Hey, Henry.
>> Hi, Michael.
>> Hey, it's great to have you here on the channel and just a moment on the podcast.
It's going to be a lot of fun, isn't it?
>> Yes, thanks for having me.
>> Yeah, you bet.
So yeah, let's kick it off and talk about some higher energy physics and a bunch of
packages and all sorts of cool stuff.
There's a lot to cover, so I'm excited to get to it.
Henry, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah, it's great to have you here.
I'm always fascinated with cutting edge physics
with maybe both ends of physics.
I'm really fascinated with astrophysics
and the super large, and then also the very, very small.
And we're going to probably tend a little bit
towards the smaller, high energy things this time around.
But so much fun to talk about this stuff
and how it intersects Python.
Some of the smallest things you can measure
and some of the largest amounts of data you can get out.
Yeah, yeah, the data story is actually really, really crazy. And we're going to talk a bit about that.
But so neat, so much stuff, like we used to think that, you know, atoms were smallest things
get right. Like I remember learning that in elementary school, like there are these things
called atoms, they combine to form compounds and stuff. And that that's as small as it gets. And
Yeah, not so much, right?
Yeah, that was sort of what adam was supposed to mean
exactly the smallest bit but
Nope it but that name got used up. So there we are
All right. Well before we get into all that stuff though, let's start with your story. How do you get into programming in python?
Well, I started with um
A little bit of programming that my dad taught me. He was a physicist
and I remember it was
C++ and sort of taught the way you would teach Java, you know all objects and classes
Did just a little bit and then when I started at uh college then I wanted to take I wanted to take classes
And I took a couple classes again in C++
um, but I just really loved objects and classes, which unfortunately the the courses didn't actually cover that much but the book did so
I really got
into that
And then for python
Actually, right when I started college, I started using this program called Blender.
- And it had a-- - Oh, yeah, Blender.
I've heard of Blender. It's like...
3D animation tool, like Maya or something like that, right?
- Yes, but open source. - It's very Python.
- Really cool. - Yeah, and it's very Python friendly, right?
Yes, it has a built-in Python interpreter.
And so I knew it had this built-in language called Python,
so that made me really want to learn Python.
And then when I went to an REU, a Research Experience
for Undergraduates at Northwestern University
in Chicago.
And when I was there, we had this cluster
that we were working on.
This was in solid state physics, material physics.
And we would launch these simulations on the cluster.
And so I started using Python.
And I was able to write a program that
go out and it would create a bunch of threads
and it would watch all of the nodes in the cluster.
And as soon as one became available, it would take it.
So I could just, my simulation could just take
the entire cluster after a few hours,
I would have everything.
So at the end of that, everybody hated me
and everybody wanted my scripts.
- Exactly, they're like, this is horrible.
I can't believe you did that to me,
but I'll completely forgive you if you just give it to me
and only to me because I need that power.
(laughing)
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
How neat.
So I think that is one of the cool things about Python,
right, is that it has this quick prototyping approachability
that you're like, I'm just gonna take over
a huge hardware, right, like a huge cluster of servers,
but it itself doesn't have to be like intense programming.
It can be like this elegant little bit of code, right?
- You can sort of do things that normally,
I think the programming gets in the way more,
but Python tends to stay out.
It looks more like pseudocode.
So you can do more and learn more
and eventually you can go do it in C++ or something.
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Or yeah, or maybe not.
Sometimes you do need to go do it in some other language
and sometimes you don't.
I think the stuff at CERN and LHC
has an interesting exchange between C++
and maybe some more Python and whatnot.
So that'll be fun to talk about.
Yeah, we've been C++ originally, but Python is really showing up in a lot more places
and there's been a lot of movement in that direction.
There have been some really interesting things that have come out, a lot of interesting things
have come out of the LIC, competing-wise as well as physics.
Awesome, yeah.
As a computing bit of infrastructure, there's a ton going on there.
And as physics, it's kind of the center of the particle physics world, right?
So it's got those two parallel things generating,
all sorts of cool stuff.
I want to go back to just really quickly to,
you talked about your dad teaching a little programming.
If people are out there and they're the dad,
they want to teach their kids a little bit of programming,
I want to give a shout out to CodeCombat.com.
Such a cool place.
My daughter just yesterday was like,
"Hey dad, I want to do a little Python.
Remember that game that taught me programming?"
Like, "Yeah, yeah, sure."
So she's like, she logged in and started playing
and basically solve a dungeon interactively
by writing Python.
And it's such an approachable way,
but it's not the like draggy, droppy, fake stuff.
You write real Python,
which I think is cool to introduce kids that way.
So anyway, shout out to them.
I had them on the podcast before,
but it's cool to see kids like take into it in that way.
Whereas you say it like you could write a terminal app.
They're like, I don't wanna do that,
but solve a dungeon.
Yeah, they could do that.
- Yeah, I've actually played with a couple of those.
They're actually really fun just to play with.
- Yeah, they are exactly.
I did like 40 dungeons along with my daughter.
It was very cool.
How about now?
What do you do now?
So I work in a lot of different areas,
and I jump around a lot.
So I do a mix of coding.
I do some work on websites because they just
needed maintenance, and somehow I got volunteered.
And some writing.
So less coding than I would like,
but I definitely do get to do it, which is fun.
- Yeah, and this is at CERN or your university
or where is this?
- So now I'm at Princeton University
and I'm part of a sort of a local group
of RSCs, Research Software Engineers.
And I'm also part of the IRISEP,
which we'll talk about a little bit,
but that's sort of a very spread out group.
Some, a few of us are at CERN, a few are in some other places,
a few in Fermilab.
And I think physicists are just used to working remote.
The pandemic wasn't that big of a change for us.
We were already doing all our meetings remote.
We just eventually changed from video to Zoom.
But other than that, it was--
Exactly.
It was real similar for me as well.
That's interesting.
Fermilab, that's in Chicago, outside Chicago, right?
Yes.
Is that still going?
I got the sense that that was shutting down.
So they're big in neutrino physics.
So they do a lot of neutrino things there.
And then they're also very active just
in the particle physics space.
So you may be at Fermilab, but working on CERN data.
I see.
OK, interesting.
Yeah.
I got to tour that place a little bit.
And it's a really neat place.
It is.
CERN's a neat place, too.
I would love to tour CERN.
But it wasn't 20 minutes down the street
from where I happen to be.
So I didn't make it there.
Sadly, I hope to get back there someday.
All right, well, let's talk about sort of the scikit-hep
side of things and how you got into maintaining
all of these packages.
So you found yourself in this place where you're working
on tools that help other people build packages
for the physicists and data scientists and so on, right?
So where'd that all start?
- So, with maintenance itself, the first thing I started maintaining was a package called
Plumbum back in 2015. And at that point, I was starting to submit some PRs, and the author
came to me and said, you know, I would like to have somebody do the releases. I need a
release manager. I don't have enough time. And I said, sure, I'd be happy to do it. And
And it was exciting for me because it was the first package
or like real package I got to join.
And so I think in the page,
I might even still have the original news item
when it says welcome to me.
But so that was the first thing I started maintaining.
And then I was working on a high-energy physics tool
called Goofit when I became a postdoc.
And I worked on sort of really renovating that.
It started out as a code written by physicists.
And I worked on making it actually installable
and packaged nicely and worked with a student
to add Python bindings to it, things like that.
And as part of that, I wrote a C++ package, CLI 11.
This is the first package I actually
wrote and then maintained.
That's actually in C++.
And that was written for Goofit, but now it's a fairly,
I think it's done pretty well on its own.
- Nice, what's that one do?
- Microsoft Terminal uses it.
- Yeah, Microsoft Terminal uses it?
Oh, nice.
Yeah, I'm a big fan of Microsoft Terminal.
I've for a while now kind of shied away
from working on Windows
because the terminal experience has been really crummy.
You know, the cmd.exe command prompt style
it's just like, oh, why is it so painful?
And people who work in that all day,
they might not see this painful,
but if you get to work in something like a macOS terminal,
or even to not quite the same degree,
but still in like a Linux one,
then all of a sudden, yeah, it kind of gets there.
So, but I'm kind of warming up to it again
with Windows Terminal.
- Yeah, the Xterm is one of the reasons I use,
I moved to Mac 'cause I loved Xterm.
And then, Windows Terminal is amazing.
Now it's a great team working on it,
including the fact that they used my cursor,
but it's actually quite nice.
The only problem I have in Windows 10
is it's really hard to get the thing
to show up instead of CMD prompt.
- Yeah, I think it's different than Windows 11, right?
- It's the only one, yeah.
- I definitely think it's included now, which is great.
So CLI 11, this is a C++ 11 command line parser, right?
Like click or arg parse or something like that,
but for C++, right?
- Yes, it was designed off of the Plumbum command line parser
'cause Plumbum's sort of a toolkit
and it has several different things.
I wish those things had been pulled out
'cause I think on their own, they might have
maybe even been popular on their own.
It has a really nice parser,
but it was sort of designed off of that and off click.
So it has some similarities to both of those.
- Yeah, I think probably that's a challenge.
I mean, we're gonna get into scikit-hub
with a whole bunch of these different packages,
but finding the right granularity of what is a
self-contained unit that you want to share with people
or versus things like pulling out a command line parser
rather than some other library, right?
This is a careful balance.
- It's a bit challenging.
I think in Python, there's a really strong emphasis
to having the individual separate pieces and packages,
especially in Python,
partially because it has a really good packaging system.
And that being able to take things, have just pieces
and be able to swap out one that you don't like
is really, really nice.
And that's sort of, that's one of the things
we'll talk about the Pipea as well.
And that's one of the things that they focus on
is small individual packages that each do a job
versus like all in one.
- Yeah.
- Poetry detecting.
you'll have to do some checking or some fact checking,
balancing, modernizing for me.
I did professional C++ development for a couple of years
and I really enjoyed it until there were better options.
And then I'm like, why am I still doing this?
I would go work on those.
But one of the things that struck me as a big difference
to that world is basically the number of libraries you use,
the granularity of the libraries you use,
the relative acceptance of things like pip
and the ease of using another library, right?
If in C++, you've got the header
and you've got the linked file and you've got the DLL,
and there's like all sorts of stuff
that can like get out of sync and go crazy
and like make weird crashes,
your app just goes away and that's not great.
Is that still true?
I feel like that difference is one of the things
that allows for people to make these smaller,
composable pieces in Python?
- I think that has a lot to do with it.
What has happened in C++ is there's sort of a rise
of a lot of header-only libraries.
And these libraries are a lot easier
to just drop into your project
because all you do is you put in the headers
and you don't have to deal with a lot of the original issues.
So a lot of these small standalone libraries
are header-only.
And one of the next things that I picked up as a maintainer was PyBind 11.
And I've sort of been in that space sort of between C++ and Python for quite a bit.
I kind of like being in that area.
- Yeah. - Joining the two.
I get a sense from listening to the things that you've worked on previously
and things like this that you're interested in connecting and enabling,
like piecing together, like, here's my script that's going to pull together the compute on this cluster,
or here's this library that pulls together Python and C++ and so on.
Yes, making different things work together and combining things like C++ and Python
or combining different packages in Python and piecing together a solution.
I think that's one of Python's strengths versus something like MATLAB.
I spent quite a bit of time in MATLAB early on and got to move a lot of stuff over to Python.
Right on, that's awesome.
It was really nice. We didn't have to have a license and things like that.
I know it's so expensive.
And then you get the, what are they called?
Toolkits, the add-on toolkits.
And they're like, each toolkit is the price of, you know,
another thousand dollars a year, $2,000 a year.
It's ridiculous.
So I know of CFFI, which is a way for Python and C
to get clicked together in a simple way.
What, how's PyBind 11 fit into that?
This is seamless interoperability between C++ 11
and Python. How are they different?
So, CFFI, I teach a little short course where I can go through some of the different binding
tools and it usually ends up me saying Python 11 is my favorite.
Yeah, cool. Give us an overview of what the options are and stuff.
It's closer to C types. It's focused on C versus C++. And it's actually the one I've
I've used the least, those just helping,
we're just talking with the CFI developer,
but I've used it the least of those.
But I think it basically parses your C headers,
and then sort of automates a lot of what
you would have to manually do with C types,
or you have to specify what symbol you wanna call,
and what the arguments are, and what the return type is,
and if one of those things is wrong,
you get a segfault and that sort of thing.
Whereas PyBind 11, this is about building modules,
extension modules.
So, and it's, the interesting thing about this
is that it's written in pure C++.
The other tools out there, so Cython can do this,
it's not what it was designed for,
but it immediately became popular for doing this
because Cython turned code, Python-like code
is a new language, into, it transpiled it into C
or C++, it had a toggle you could change,
has a toggle you can change.
And then when you're there, you can now call C or C++.
But it's extremely verbose, and you repeat yourself,
and you have to learn another language.
It's this weird combined Python thing.
And just thinking in Cython is difficult,
because you have to think about, well, am I in Python?
Or am I in Cython that's going to be bound to Python?
Or am I in Cython that's just going straight to C, C++?
Or am I just in C++?
Or C++?
A lot of layers there, yeah.
- Python 11 is just C++ and it's just, it's basically,
it's like the C API for Python, but a C++ API.
So it's quite natural and you don't have to learn
a new language.
It uses some fairly advanced C++, but that's it.
You're learning something useful anyway.
- Right.
So do you do some sort of like template type thing
and then say, I'm going to expose this class to Python
or something like that, and then it figures out,
Does it write the Python code or what is it?
- It's writing the--
- Like data so files or what do you do here?
- It compiles into the C API calls
and then that would compile into a data cell.
- Right.
- And there's no separate step like Python or Swig
or these other tools because it's just C++.
You compile it like you do any other C++,
but it's actually internally using the CPython API
or PyPy's wrapper for it.
- Yeah, that's really cool.
- And the language looks a lot like Python,
but the names are similar.
You just do a def to define a function
and you give it the name and then you just pass it
the pointer to the underlying thing.
It can figure out things like types
and stuff like that for you.
You can do docstring if you want,
you can argue its names.
You can make it as Pythonic as you want.
It's verbose, but it's not overly verbose.
- Yeah, that's really neat.
And for people who haven't used those kinds of outputs,
basically it's just import module name,
whether it's a .py file or it's a .so file.
- PyTorch if you've used, SciPy if you've used,
any of those things,
you've been importing some PyPy to 11 code.
- Yeah, awesome.
All right.
So let's talk a little bit about
And scikit-hep.
This is one of the projects that
it has a lot of these packages inside of it.
And your library, cbuild wheel,
CI build wheel, excuse me,
is one of the things that is used to maintain
and build a lot of those packages.
'Cause I'm sure they have a lot of interesting
and oddball dependencies, right?
I mean, C++ is kind of standard,
but there's probably others as well, right?
- It is, so one thing that is kind of
somewhat unique to HEP is that we are very heavily invested
in C++.
So there's, it's usually either you're gonna see Python
or you're gonna see some sort of C++ package of some sort.
I mean, it could be, it varies in size there,
but it's mostly C++ or Python.
We really haven't used other languages much
for the past.
Is that inertia or is that by choice?
Why is that?
I think it's partially the community is a fairly cohesive
community.
We're really used to working together.
The experiments themselves are often--
might be a thousand or several thousand physicists
working on a single experiment.
And we have been fairly good about meeting together
and sort of deciding the direction that we want to go in
and then sort of sticking to that.
So for C++, it was heavily Root,
which is a giant C++ framework.
And it got everything in it.
And that was C++ and that's what everybody used.
- Right, so Root is the library.
If I was going to write code that would run
and interact with like the grid computing
or the data access and all that kind of stuff at LHC,
I would use this root library
if I was doing that in C++, right?
- Yes, and you might be using interpreted C++,
which is something we invented.
- Oh, okay.
This is interesting.
Is this something people can use?
- Oh, yes, we actually,
so Cint was the original interpreter
and then it got replaced by Cling,
which is built on the LLVM.
And I think recently it was merged to mainline LLVM
as Clang-Ripple, I think it's called.
It's sort of a lightweight version.
Yeah, it's a C++ interpreter.
You can actually get Zeus-Cling,
which I think Quantstack does,
but they package it as well, I think, Zeus-Cling.
- Okay, yeah, very interesting.
- It's not, C++ really wasn't designed
friend notebook though. It does work. But you can't rerun a cell
often because of the you can't redefine things. Python is just
really natural in a notebook and C++ is not.
Right. Yeah, especially if you change the type you compile it
as an int and then you're like, Oh, that should be a string.
Like, yeah, that's not gonna be a string. It's compiled. Yeah,
interesting. So it seems to me like the community at CERN has
decided, look, we need some low level stuff. And there's some
crazy low level things that happen over there.
People can check out a video,
maybe I'll mention a little bit later.
But for that use, they've sort of gravitated towards C.
And then for the other aspects,
it sounds like Python is what everyone agreed to.
It's like, hey, we want to visualize this.
We want to do some notebook stuff.
We want to piece things together, something like that, right?
- It's certainly moving that way.
They definitely have sort of agreed
that Python should be a first class language
and join C++.
That was decided a few years ago.
And I think that's been a great step in the right direction.
Because what was happening, people
were coming in with Python knowledge.
They wanted to use Pandas.
And I came in that way as well.
Pandas and Numba and all these tools
were really, really nice.
And we were basically just having
to write them all ourselves in C++.
It has a data frame.
but why not just use Python,
which is what people know anyway.
- Panda exists, there's a ton of people already doing this,
the work maintaining it for us.
- It literally has a stream class.
- Yeah, okay.
- Literally, they do everything.
So, sort of the idea,
and this is sort of the idea behind scikit-hep,
was to build this collection of packages
that would just fill in the missing pieces,
the things that high energy physicists were used to
and needed, and some of them are general
and were just gaps in the data science ecosystem,
and some things are very specific to high energy physics.
So PsyConHEP actually sort of originated
as a single package.
It sort of looked like root red at first,
and it was invented by someone called Eduardo Rodriguez,
who was actually in my office at CERN,
and we're office mates.
And, but he did something I think really brilliant
when he did this,
and that is he created an organization
called Scikit-Hep around it,
and then he went out and spoke with people
and got some of the other Python packages
that existed at the time to join Scikit-Hep,
moved them over and started building
sort of a collection of some of the most popular
Python packages at the time.
And I thought that was great.
And I really wanted scikit-hep to become a collection
of tools, separate tools, and for the scikit-hep package
to just be sort of a meta package
that just grabbed all the rest.
And that's actually kind of where it is now.
- Right, I can pip install scikit-hep, is that right?
- You can, and mostly, other than a few little things
that are still in there that never got pulled out,
that will mostly just install our most popular,
maybe 15 or so packages,
2015 of our most popular packages.
- Yeah, so it probably doesn't really do anything
other than say it depends on those packages
or something like that, right?
And then by virtue of installing it, it'll grab it.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a really cool idea and I like it.
So maybe one of the things I thought would be fun
is to go through some of the packages there
to give people a sense of what's in here.
Some of these are pretty particular
and I don't think would find broad use outside of CERN.
For example, conda forge root.
It sounds like that's about building root
so I can install it as a dependency
or something like that, right?
- Yeah, building root is horrible.
And you actually now can get it as part of a conda package,
which is just way better than anything that was available
for attaching to a specific version of Python
'cause it has to compile against
a very specific version of Python.
But that's what it does.
So unless you want something in root,
then that's very HEP-specific.
Some of the more general ones, probably our first--
briefly mention our very first package
that I think was really popular among high-energy physicists
that we actually produced was uproot,
which was just a pure Python package,
so you didn't have to install it, that read root files.
So again, very specific for somebody
who was in high energy physics,
but you could actually read a root file
and get your data without installing a root.
And that was a game changer.
And now you can actually install root slightly easier,
but normally it's a multi-hour compile
and it's gotten better,
but it's still a bit of a beast to compile,
especially for Python.
- That does sound like a beast.
Oh my gosh.
- And now you can just read in your files.
Basically, Jim Pofarski basically just taught Python
to understand the decompiler root file structure.
And actually can write it right now too,
but originally reading.
But that actually was really--
- So this is like if I wanna do,
if I wanna create a notebook
and maybe visualize some of the data,
but I don't really need access to anything else,
I shouldn't depend on this beast
of almost its own operating system type of thing, right?
- We're very close to being able to use
all the data science tools in Python,
pandas, things like that.
for most data worked fine.
You just had to get the data.
And I mean, I've done this too,
where I had one special install of Python and root together
that I'd worked several hours on and it sat somewhere
and I would convert data with it,
I'd move it to HDF5.
And then I would do all the rest of the analysis in Python
that didn't have root because then I could do--
- And then there's Python libraries
that read that HDF5 format, right?
- Yeah. - Right, okay.
The first package we had that was really popular on its own
was awkward array.
- Yeah, awkward arrays.
- Awkward array was originally--
- I've definitely heard about this one, yeah.
- Yeah, that was originally part of UPROOT,
sort of grew out of UPROOT,
but when you're reading root files,
you end up with these jagged arrays.
So that's an array that is not rectangular.
So at least one dimension is jagged,
it depends on the data.
And this shows up in all sorts of places,
not just particle collisions.
Or obviously, it shows up lots of places
in particle collisions.
How many hits got triggered in the detector?
That's a variable length list.
How many tracks are in an event?
And it can be a variable length list of structured data.
And to store that compactly the same way you would use NumPy
was one thing.
But you can-- arrow, and there's some other things that do this.
But Awkward Array also gives you NumPy-like indexing
and data manipulation.
And that was the breakthrough thing here.
It's like NumPy.
The original one was built on top of NumPy.
The new one actually has some PyBind11 compiled bits
and pieces.
But it makes working with that really well.
In fact, Jim Pofarski has now got a grant to expand this to--
I don't remember the number of different disciplines
that he's working with, but lots of different areas, genomics
and things like that have all have use cases
and he's adding things like complex numbers
and things that weren't originally needed
by HydroGPhysicists, but make it widely used.
- Almost an evangelism, like dev evangelism type of role,
right, go talk to the other groups and say,
hey, we think you should be using this.
What is it missing for you to really love it?
Something like that, right?
How interesting.
Yeah, yeah, so looking at the awkward array page here,
says for a similar problem,
two million times larger than this example given above,
which one above is not totally simple.
So that's pretty crazy.
It says awkward array,
the one-liner takes 4.6 seconds to run
and uses two gigs of memory.
The equivalent Python list in dictionaries
takes over two minutes
and uses 10 times as much memory, 22 gigs.
So yeah, that's a pretty appealing value proposition there.
Yeah, and it supports Numba.
Jim has been very, works very closely with the Numba team,
and really is one of the experts on the Numba internals.
So, you know, it has full Numba support now,
and he's working on adding Dask.
He's working with Anaconda on this grant,
and then working with adding GPU support.
Very cool.
Maybe not everyone out there knows what Numba is.
Maybe give us a quick elevator pitch on Numba.
I hear it makes Python code fast, right?
Yeah, it's a just-in-time compiler.
And it takes Python.
It actually takes the bytecode.
And then it basically takes that back to something--
or it parses the bytecode and turns it into LLVM.
So it works a lot like Julia, except instead of a new language,
it's actually reading Python bytecode, which is challenging because the Python
bytecode is not something that stays static or supposed to be a public detail.
- Yeah, there's no public promises about consistency of bytecode across versions
because they play with that all the time to try to speed up things and add bytecodes
and they try to do little optimizations.
and--
Yeah.
So every Python release breaks Numbus.
So they have to--
they just know the next Python release will not support
Number, and it usually takes a month or two.
OK.
All right.
So-- yeah, go ahead.
It's very impressive, though.
It's the speedups.
You do get full C-type speedups for something
that looks just like Python.
It compiles really fast for a small problem.
And it's as fast as anything else you can do.
I've tried lots of these various programming problems
and you just about can't beat them,
but it actually knows what your architecture is
since it's just in time compiling.
So you have to do all sorts of things.
- Which is an advantage over, say, like C, right?
It can look exactly at what your platform is
and your machine architecture and say,
we're going to target, you know,
I see your CPU supports this special vectorized thing
or whatever, and it's going to build that in, right?
- Yeah.
And then what sort of Jim does with Awkward,
and we've done with some other things with vector does this too.
You can control what Python turns into what LLVM constructs
any Python turns into, because you can control that compile phase.
That's incredibly powerful, because you can say,
and it doesn't have to be the same thing,
but obviously you want it to behave the same way,
but you'd say, if you see this structure, this is what it turns into.
in LLVM machine code, which then gets compiled,
or machine language then gets compiled into your native
machine language.
Interesting. So if you have like a certain data structure
that you know can be well represented
or gets packed up in a certain way to be super efficient,
you can control that?
Yeah, you can say that,
well, this operation on this data structure, this is what it should do.
And then that turns into LLVM and maybe it can get vectorized
or things like that for you.
Yeah.
That's super neat.
Another package in the list that I got to talk about,
because just the name and the graphic is fantastic,
is a gas.
What is a gas?
It's got like this--
the scream.
I forgot who was the artist of that.
But the scream sort of look as part of the logo is good.
About half of the logos come from Jim.
And I did about half, and he did about half,
and then a few other around
or from the individual Akitakes.
Aghast was, so this is sort of part of the histogramming
area, which is where, sort of the area I work in,
Scikit-Hep, but Jim actually wrote Aghast,
and the idea was that it would convert
between histogram representations.
I think it came up because Jim got tired
of writing histogram libraries.
I think he's written at least five.
- Yeah, one of the things I got the sense of
by looking through all the Scikit-Hep stuff,
There's a lot of histogram stuff happening over there.
Yes, so histograms is sort of the area that I was in,
and it ended up coming in in several pieces.
But I think one of the important things was actually--
and I think Aghast may not really matter,
may get archived at some point.
Because instead of translating between different
representations of histograms in memory, what you can do
is define a static typing protocol.
and it can be checked by mypy,
that describes what an object needs to be called a histogram.
And so I've defined that as a package called UHI,
Universal Histogram Interface.
And anything that implements UHI,
it can be fully checked by mypy, will then
be able to take any object from any library that implements UHI.
And so all the libraries we have that produce histograms,
So uproot, when it reads a root histogram,
or hist, hist and boost histogram,
when they produce histograms,
they don't need to depend on each other.
They don't even depend on UHI.
That's just a static dependency for IPy time.
And then they can be plotted in, in MPLHEP,
or they can be printed to the terminal with histoprint,
and there's no dependencies there.
One doesn't need the other.
- Yeah.
- And that's sort of making a guest somewhat
unneeded because now it really doesn't matter.
You don't have to convert between two
because they both just work.
- They work on the same underlying structure,
basically, right?
- They work through the same interface.
- Right.
Yeah, so a GAST is a way to work
with different histogramming libraries
that kind of is the intermediary of that,
to the abstraction layer on that.
Okay.
What are some other ones?
- Aggregated.
- Yeah.
What are some other ones we should kind of give a shout out to?
We talked about Goofit, which is their--
- That's an affiliated package.
It's not part of scikit-hep, but it has.
So we developed this idea of an affiliated package,
which were things that didn't need to be moved in,
but had at least one scikit-hep developer
working with them.
Or at least that's my definition.
I was never able to actually get the rest
to agree to exactly that definition,
but that's my working definition.
And so that's why PyBind11 gets listed there.
it's a affiliated package because we share a developer,
me, with the PyBind11 library.
And we sort of have a say in that
and how that is developed.
And most importantly,
if we have somebody come into scikit-hep,
we want them to use PyBind11 over the other tools
because that one we have a lot of experience with.
- Very cool.
Another one I thought was interesting is hep units.
So this idea of representing units like, you know,
the standard units, they're not enough for us.
We have our own kind of things like molarity and stuff,
but also luminosity and other stuff, right?
- Yeah, different experience can differ a bit.
So there's a sort of a standard
that got built up for units.
And so this just sort of puts that together
and has, and the unit that we've sort of decided on,
this should be the standard unit.
That's one, and the rest are different scalars.
So it's a very tiny little library.
It was the first one to be fully statically typed,
because it was tiny.
- That's easy to do.
- Because myPy and first constants,
there was like two functions or something,
and then it was done.
- Yeah, probably a lot of floats.
- But that's sort of what it is.
So you can use that,
and the idea is that the rest of the libraries
will adhere to that system of units.
So then if you use this and then use the values it gives you,
then you can have a nice human readable units
and be sure of your units.
- Yeah, that's really neat.
Have you heard of Pint?
Are you familiar with this one?
- Yes, I love Pint.
- Oh, I think Pint is interesting as well.
- Pint actually takes the types through
and I use Pint some.
But it actually gives you a quantity out,
or a numpy quantity.
Whereas the happiness just stays out of the way
and it's a way to be more clear in your code,
but it's not enforced.
Pint is enforced, which I like enforcing,
but it also can slow down.
You can't, these are not actual real numbers anymore.
So you pay--
- Yeah, so it's gonna add a ton of overhead, right?
But Pint's interesting 'cause you can do things
like three times meter plus four times centimeter,
and you end up with 3.04 meters.
- Yeah, 'cause those are actual real quantities.
They're actually a different object,
which is the good thing about it,
but it's also the reason that then it's not gonna talk
to, say, a C library that expects a regular number
or something as well. - Sure.
Sure, okay, maybe one or two more,
and then we'll probably be out of time for these.
But what else do people maybe pay attention to
that they could generally find useful over here?
- You can mention vector, it's a little bit newer,
but it's certainly for general physics, I think it's useful,
because it's a library for 2D, 3D, and relativistic vectors.
And there aren't really--
it's a very common sort of learning example you see,
but there aren't really very many libraries that do this,
that actually have--
if you want to take the magnitude of a vector in 3D
space, there just isn't a nice library for that.
So we wrote Vector to do that.
And Vector is supported by Awkward.
It has an Awkward backend.
It has a NumBy backend and then PlainObject backend.
And eventually, we might work on more.
And it even has a NumBy Awkward.
So you can use a vector inside an Awkward array,
inside a NumBy JIT compiled loop,
and still take magnitudes and do stuff like that.
That's really cool, that integration there.
Yeah.
Because we have a lot of those in physics.
Sure.
And you can do things like ask if one vector is
close to another vector and things like that,
even in different--
it looks like one in polar coordinates and one in Cartesian
or something like that.
>>It has different unit systems.
And it can actually--
it actually stores the vector in that.
So you don't waste memory or something
if that's the representation you have.
That was a feature from Root that we
wanted to make sure we got.
And it also has the idea of momentums, too,
and stuff for the relativistic stuff.
- Yeah.
- End up with a lot of that.
- So, yeah, go ahead.
- And then maybe just mention the,
since we mentioned the histogramming stuff
and that's the area, that's the ones that I really work on.
The ones I specifically work on that are general purpose.
Boost histogram is a wrapper
for the C++ boost histogram library.
- Okay.
- Boost is the sort of the big C++ library,
just one step below the standard library.
And right at the time I was starting at Princeton,
I met the author of Boost's histogram,
who's from physics.
And he was in the process, I believe,
of getting this accepted into Boost.
And it got accepted after that.
But one of the things that he decided to do
was pull out his initial Python bindings
that were written in Boost Python,
which is actually very similar to PyBind11,
but requires Boost instead of not requiring anything.
But the design is intentionally very similar.
And so I proposed I would work on Boost Histogram
and write these Python bindings for it inside scikit-hep.
And that would be sort of the main project
I started on when I started at Princeton.
And that's what I did.
Boost Histogram is an extremely powerful histogramming
library.
So it's a histogram as an object rather than--
like in NumPy, there's a histogram function,
and you give it an array, and then it spits a couple of arrays
back out at you that you now have to manage these.
They don't have any special meaning.
Whereas BoostHistogram, histograms really
are much more natural as an object, just like a data frame
is more natural as an object where you tie that information
together.
A histogram's really natural that way,
where you still have the information about what the data
actually was on the axes.
If you have labels, you want to keep those attached to that data.
And you may need to fill again, which is one of the main things that
hydrophysicists really wanted because we tend to fill histograms and then keep filling them
or rebinning them or doing operations on them.
And you can do all those very naturally.
And Boost Histograms, the actual C++ wrapper in PyBind 11,
and I actually got involved in CI Buildable because of Boost Histogram
because one of the things I wanted is make sure it worked everywhere.
And it obviously requires C++, so it requires compilation.
Yeah.
And then HIST is a nice wrapper on top of that
that just makes it a lot more friendly to use
because the original Boost.js author wants to keep this, Hans Stavinsky,
wants to keep this quite pure and clean.
So HIST is more natural.
And even if you're not in HEP, I think that's still the more natural one to use.
Yeah.
And those...
Right, right.
There's a lot of people who use histogram
to cross all sorts of disciplines.
So that would definitely be one of those
that is generally useful.
All right, so I think that brings us to CI build wheel.
Let's talk a bit about that.
And I mean, maybe the place to start here is
you want our wheels, right?
The first sentence describing it is
Python wheels are great.
Build them across Mac, Linux, Windows,
and other multiple versions of Python.
Not so much.
So--
- No description of what a wheel is.
- Yeah, exactly.
Well, wheels are good.
There's times when there are no wheels
and things install slower.
They might not install at all.
It's generally a bad thing if you don't have a wheel,
but they're not easy to make, right?
So tell us what is a wheel,
and then let's talk about why maybe building them
across all these platforms and this cross product
along with like versions of Python and whatnot is a mess.
- Yeah, so when you distribute Python,
you have several options.
The most common one and most packages
have at least an sdist,
which is just basically a tarball of the source.
- Right, when you pip install it, it's basically--
- Modify it slightly and it will be
you're missing a few things or adding some things.
But otherwise, it's mostly the source.
- Yeah, it unzips your source
and puts it somewhere Python will find it
and then that's that.
- Yeah, so it runs your build system.
So setup tools traditionally,
that's become a lot more powerful recently,
but it has to run the build system
to figure out what do you do with it.
This is just a bunch of files.
And then it puts it together in a particular structure
on your computer.
And so a wheel was a package that was already,
everything was already in place.
So it's already in a particular structure.
It knows the structure and all Python has to do
for a pure Python wheel,
one that does not have any binary pieces in it.
it just grabs the contents inside
and dumps them following a specific set of rules
into places into your site packages.
- Right, exactly. - So then you now
have something installed.
There's no setup.py in your wheel.
There's no pyproject.toml.
Those sorts of things are not in the wheel.
The wheel's already there.
It can't run arbitrary code.
- Yeah, exactly.
That was one of the points I was gonna make.
- It takes some people in. - It's one of those things
that can be scary about installing packages
is just by virtue of installing them,
you're running arbitrary code because often that is execute,
Python space, setup py space, install or something like that
and like whatever that thing does,
that's what happens when you pip install, right?
But now with wheels, as you said,
it comes down in a binary blob and just like,
boom, here it is.
Obviously the thinking is,
we have this package delivered to a million computers,
why do we need to have every million computer
run all the steps, why don't we just run it once
and then go here, and then also that saves you
a ton of time, right?
Like I just installed micro-WSGI and it took,
I don't know, 30 seconds, 45 seconds to install
'cause it didn't have a wheel, so it sat there
and it just grinded away compiling it, you know?
- Yeah, so there's two possibilities.
A pure Python package, a wheel is still superior
because of the not running arbitrary code.
Pip will actually go ahead and compile all your PYC files.
So it goes ahead and makes the bytecode for all those,
if it's a wheel.
If it's a tarball, it doesn't do that.
If it doesn't pass through the wheel stage anyway.
And then every time you open the file,
then it's going to have to make that bytecode.
So it'll be a little slower the first time you open it.
There's a variety of reasons.
I think it's pythonwheels.com, something
like that, that describes why you should use wheels.
That's maybe that's not it.
Yes, Python wheels.
So they have like a list of advantages there.
But-
- Yeah, I also have a little like checklist.
It says, how are we doing for the top 360 packages?
And apparently 342 of them have wheels
and it shows you for your popular packages,
which ones, like click does, but future doesn't,
for example, and so on.
- Yeah, future's been there for a long time.
But yeah, so wheels are really good.
And they actually replaced an older mechanism
that was trying to do something somewhat similar
called eggs, but I avoid talking about those.
I don't really understand.
- Let it live in the past.
- But wheels also are a great way
if you have compile that happens.
So if you compile some code as part of your build,
then that of course is much slower.
If you have the--
- Like my Microsoft G example.
Yeah, it's like it was doing GCC or something.
- If you don't have a compiler, it won't even work.
- Right, exactly.
- You have to have some setup, at least a little setup.
You have to have a compiler setup at the very moment.
- How many Windows users have seen
cannot find vcvars.bat, right?
You don't want to be in the environment
or you have to have the right script sourced, yes.
- Yeah.
- So wheels also can contain binary components
like .so's and things.
And they have a tag as part of their name.
They have a very special naming scheme for wheels
and the tag is stored in the wheel too.
And they can tell you what Python version they're good for,
what platform they are supported on.
They have a build number.
And then they have a,
the Python's actually in two pieces.
There's the ABI and the interface.
- Yeah, you can see there's some huge long name
that with a bunch of underscores separating it
and basically, we tried to install it.
Sorry, go ahead.
It's also one of the reasons that names are normalized.
There's no difference between a dash and underscore.
It's because that special wheel name has dashes in it.
So the package name at that point in the file name
has to be underscores.
- Interesting. Yeah, okay.
Yeah, and so basically when you pip install,
it says, it builds up that name and says,
"Do you have this as a binary?
"Give it to me," right?
Something like this?
- Mm-hmm.
Yeah, it knows how to pick out the right,
it looks for the right one.
If it finds a binary, it'll just download it.
depending slightly on the system and how new your pip is.
- Right, and this is one of the main innovations,
ideas or philosophies behind Conda and Anaconda, right?
It's like, let's just take that and make sure
that we build all of these things in a really clear way
and then sort of package up the testing and compilation
and distributing all that together, right?
- Yes, this is very similar to, this came, I think,
I'm pretty sure it came after Conda.
I think they were still in eggs when condo was invented.
And then sort of building up wheels was challenging.
Building a wheel was challenging.
And that's, CI build wheel has really changed that.
If you want to pure Python, it's really easy.
You use, today you should be using the build tool,
which I'm a maintainer of that as well.
But build just builds an STIST for you,
or it builds a wheel.
- Right, and so you would say something like Python,
set up UI BDist or something like that.
And then boom, out comes your wheel.
- I shouldn't be doing that anymore, please don't.
But that is how you--
- Yeah, how would I do it?
Tell me the right way.
- The best way.
Well, you could do Python or pip install build.
And then Python dash m build.
And that will build both an SDist and a wheel.
And it'll build the wheel from the SDist.
If you use pipx, which I would recommend,
then you can just say pipx run build
and you don't have to do anything.
That'll download build into a virtual environment for you.
It'll do it and then eventually it'll throw away
the virtual environment after a week.
- Interesting, okay.
But we could just use the build.
We should be using the build.
- You should be using the build tool.
It's for Estus, there's a big benefit to this.
And that is it will use your pyproject.toml.
And if you say you require numpy,
then it will go, like you're using the NumPy headers,
the C headers, then it will go and it will,
when it's building Estus, it will make
the PEP 5.17 virtual environment.
It'll install NumPy, anything that's in your requires
in your pyproject.toml, and then it will run
the setup.py inside that environment.
So you can now import NumPy directly in there
and it'll work even when you're building an SDist.
If you do Python, SDist, or Python setup.py stuff,
it can't do that because you're literally running Python,
giving it setup.py, import numpy, now it's broken.
- Right, okay.
- Nothing triggers that call to the pyproject.toml
to see what you need.
For a wheel, the best way to do it is with pip,
or the original way to do it was with pip wheel,
because pip has to be able to build wheels
in order to install things.
That got added to pip before build existed.
But now the best way to do it would be with build wheel.
And that's actually, it's doing the right thing.
It's actually trying to build the wheel you want,
whereas pip wheel is actually just building a wheelhouse.
So if you depend on NumPy and NumPy doesn't have wheels,
They did better with Python 3.10,
so I'm not gonna complain about NumPy for Python 3.10.
But for 3.9, they didn't have wheels for a while.
So it'll build the wheels there,
and it'll build your wheels,
and it'll dump them all in the wheelhouse,
whatever the output is.
So you'll get, you'll be building NumPy wheels,
which you definitely don't wanna try to upload.
- Yeah, yeah, definitely not.
All right, well, that's really cool,
and I definitely learned something.
I will start using build instead of doing it the other way.
- You can now delete your setup.py too.
- Yeah, that's the big thing, right?
So you don't have to run that kind of stuff, right?
- Mm-hmm.
Yeah, they're trying to move away from any commands
to setup.py because you don't even need one anymore.
And you can't control that environment.
It's very much an internal detail.
- Yeah.
So, wrapping up this segment of the conversation,
we want a wheel because that's best.
It installs without requiring the compiler tools
on our system.
It installs faster.
It's built just for our platform.
The challenge is when you become a maintainer,
you got to solve this matrix of different Python versions
that are supported and different platforms.
Like for example, there's macOS Intel,
there's macOS M1, Apple Silicon,
there's multiple versions of Windows,
there's different versions of Linux, right?
Like ARM Linux versus AMD 64 Linux.
And now MUSE Linux versus the other Linux varieties.
Yeah, so one of the challenges with the wheel
is making it distributable.
So if you just go out and you build a wheel
and then you try to give it to someone else,
it may not work.
Certainly on Linux, if you try to,
pretty much if you do that, it just won't work
because the systems are gonna be different.
On macOS, it'll only work on the version
you compiled it on and not anything older.
And you'll even see people trying to compile on macOS 10.14
because they want their wheels to work as in many places.
(indistinct)
- Exactly, it's fine.
The jankiest like I've got a Mac mini from 2009.
We're building on that thing
'cause it will work for most people, right?
- I think that's how they actually build
the official Python binaries.
- Interesting.
- I'm not sure.
- Well, but then Apple went in through like last year
around this time, they threw a big spanner in the works
and said, you know what, we're going to completely switch
to ARM and our own silicon, and you got to compile
for something different now.
- Yeah, and cross compiling has always been a challenge.
Yeah, and then Windows is actually the easiest
of all of them.
You're most likely on Windows to be able to compile
something that you can give to someone else.
But the rest are- - Yeah, that's true.
That is one of the things that Microsoft's been really
pretty good at is backwards compatibility.
I get holds them back in other ways, but yeah,
typically you can run an app from 20 years ago and it'll still run.
Yeah, there are a few caveats, but not many,
at least compared to the other systems.
Apple's really good, but you do have to understand how to...
you do have to set your minimum version.
And you have to get a Python that had that minimum version set
when it was compiled.
If you do that, it works really well.
So what I actually did with...
what I actually started with in scikit-hep,
I had this, I was building Boost Histogram,
which needed to be able to run anywhere.
That was something I absolutely wanted.
It had to be pip install Boost Histogram
and it just worked no matter what.
And also we had several other compiled packages at the time.
Several we had inherited
and I-Menu was compiled and that was quite popular.
We had a couple of specific ones
and we had a couple more that ended up
becoming interested in that.
In fact, during this sort of period
is when Awkward started compiling pieces.
And so what I started with was building my own system
to do this.
It was called Azure Wheel Helpers,
which was, as you can guess by the name,
Azure was basically a set of Azure DevOps scripts.
It was right after Azure had come out.
And I wrote a series of blog posts on this
and described the exact process
and sort of the things I found out
about how you build a compatible wheel.
On macOS, you have to make sure you get
the most compatible CPython from Python.org itself.
You can't use brew or something like that,
because those are going to be compiled for whatever system
they were targeting.
And on Linux, you have to run the mini Linux system,
and you should run audit wheel.
And actually, on Mac, you should run develop--
develop wheel, though I might be getting--
I think it's develop wheel.
So there's this series of things that you have to do.
And I started maintaining this multi-hundred line set
of scripts to do this.
And I was also being limited by Azure at the time.
They didn't have all the templates and stuff they have now.
So everything had to be managed through get sub-tree
because it couldn't be a separate repository.
And then when Jim started working awkward,
he went and just rewrote the whole thing
I thought he wanted it to look simpler for him
and took a couple of things out that were needed
and suddenly made it two separate things.
Now I had to help maintain that.
So when Python 3.8 or whatever it was came out,
now I had a completely different set of changes
I had to make for that one.
And it was really just not--
it was not working out.
It was not very easy to maintain.
And I was watching CI Buildwheel.
And it was this package.
It was a Python package that would do this.
And it didn't matter what CI system you were on
because it was written in Python.
And it could follow nice sort of Python principles
for good package design.
It had unit tests and all that sort of stuff.
So it looked really good.
There were a couple of things it was missing.
I came in, I added, I made PRs for the things
that I'd come up with that it didn't have
and they got accepted.
And there was a shared maintainer
between PyBind11 and CI Buildable as well.
I think that's one of the reasons
that I sort of had heard about it
and was really watching it.
And I finally decided just to make the switch.
And I did.
At some point a little later, I actually became a maintainer
of CI Buildwheel.
But I think I started doing the switch before.
It made it really easy once I was a maintainer to say,
this is a package that we have some control over.
It's okay, let's just--
- Right, this is a safe place to depend upon this
'cause we have a city.
- It just took out all of that maintenance
and now the pin bot does all the maintenance for us.
Does the pin, moves forward a pin on CI Buildwheel
That's it.
- Nice.
So if I want to accomplish,
if I'm a package developer owner
and I want to share that package with everybody,
we've already determined we would ideally
want to have a wheel,
but getting that wheel is hard.
So CI build wheel will let you integrate it
as the name indicates into your continuous integration.
And one of those steps of CI could be build the wheel, right?
So it reduces it down to pretty much that,
that there's a step in your CI that says,
you know, run CI build wheel.
And then CI build wheel is designed to really integrate
nicely with the build matrix.
So you could, for a fairly simple package
or for many packages, you can really just do Mac,
Windows and Linux, have the same job.
I can get up actions, it's easy to do the same job.
And then call CI build wheel.
And that's about it.
It just goes through all the different versions of Python that are supported.
It just goes through and makes a wheel for each.
And in fact, it even has one feature that was really nice
that I struggled with a bit, is testing.
So if you give it a test command, it will even take your package,
it will install in a new environment that's not, you know,
in a different directory that's not related to your build at all,
and make sure it works and passes whatever test you give it.
We'll do that across the platforms.
We'll do a macOS test and a Windows test.
Yeah, for each.
So CRBL will really just seize the platform it's sitting on
because it's inside the build matrix, and so it's run for each.
And yeah, it does for each one, it will run that test.
And the simplest test is just echo,
and that will just make sure it installs
because it won't try to install your wheel
unless there's something in that test command.
Even that's useful sometimes.
- Yeah, sure.
- So it's broken sometimes because of NumPy
not supporting one of those things in that matrix.
- Yeah, it can't install the dependency,
so that step fails or something.
So it says it currently supports GitHub Actions,
Azure Pipelines, which I don't know how long
those are gonna be two separate things.
Maybe they'll always be separate,
but Microsoft owning GitHub, I feel like
they're saying two separate Azure Pipelines
and then they're kind of moving,
like, yeah, I think they're similar.
- The runners are the same.
They actually had the same environments.
Okay.
So I think they'll exist just as two different interfaces probably.
And Azure is not so tied to GitHub and it has more of an enterprise type.
Yeah, for sure.
Definitely has a different focus.
But GitHub was just a rewrite and a better rewrite in most cases of it.
They got to learn.
Yeah, I think GitHub Actions came second.
All right, so then Travis CI, AppBear, CircleCI, and GitLab CI.
At least all of those, right?
At least those are the ones we test on.
And then it runs locally.
There are some limitations to running it locally.
If you target Linux,
and you can have any system that has Docker
can target Linux.
You can just ask to build Linux wheels
and you can actually run it from like my Mac
or from Windows, I assume from a Windows machine.
I've tried Windows with Docker.
And Windows, it does install to a standard location,
C colon backslash CI build will, but other than that, it's safe to run it there.
And macOS, it will install to your macOS system.
It's installed system versions of Python.
So that's something we haven't solved yet.
We might be able to someday.
Um, so it's not a good idea unless you really are okay with installing every
version of Python that ever existed in tier.
Into your system.
Uh, maybe get a VM.
The Python.org, Python, but yeah.
Yeah.
It's, I mean, it's somewhat safe.
If you're on Windows, you could use Windows subsystem for Linux WSL as well, in addition to Docker, I suspect.
Well, the mini Linux has to run, you could, as long as you can launch Docker.
The thing that you have to be able to do is launch Docker because you have to use the mini Linux Docker images.
Or you should use that or a derivative of that.
There's lots of rules to exactly what can be in the environment and things like that.
- Okay. - And IPA maintains that.
One thing that also helps is that we have the main...
Many Linux maintainer is also a CI build wheel maintainer.
- So it's one reason those things tend... - Oh.
- That... - They fit well together.
Features tend to match.
- Yeah, indeed. - Like Musil Linux,
which is a big thing recently.
It's not actually in a released version of CI build wheel yet.
What is Musil Linux?
So a normal Linux is based on glibc and that's actually what controls
them. It's one of two things that controls mini Linux. So if can you
download the binary wheel or do you have to build? If you have an old version of
pip that won't, they had to teach pip about each version of mini Linux and
that was a mess so they eventually switched to a standard numbering
system that is your glibc number and now pip doesn't, you know, and the
The current pip will be able to install a feature Mini Linux, as long as your system supports it.
But that was a big problem.
So pip 9 can only install Mini Linux 1.
It can't install Mini Linux 10, even if your glibc is fine for it.
So the other thing is the glibc version.
And Mini Linux 1 was based on CentOS 5, Red Hat 5.
Mini Linux 2010 was CentOS 6.
Mini Linux 2014 was CentOS 7.
And then now they switched to Debian
because of CentOS sort of switching to the stream model.
So Minilinks 214, or 224 is glibc 2.24,
and that's Debian 8 or something like that.
- Okay, I see.
- So, but that's glibc-based.
There are distributions that are not glibc-based,
most notably Alpine.
So if you've ever used Alpine,
it's this tiny, tiny little Docker image.
It's a really fun distribution to use
if you're on Docker.
But it actually sounds fun to install,
but I've never tried it without Docker.
But it's these five megabyte Docker wheels,
or Docker, I guess Docker doesn't do wheels,
Docker images.
- Docker images, yeah.
- But that doesn't use glibc, that uses musel.
And so musel-index will run on Alpine.
- Okay, got it.
So if you're building for the platform Alpine
and similar ones, right?
Yeah, and you said I can run this locally as well.
I know I would use it in CI 'cause I'm trying,
I've got that matrix of all the versions of CPython
and PyPI, P-U-I, P-U-I,
and then all the platforms that I wanna check
as many of those boxes as possible
to put wheels in it, right?
Suppose I'm on my Mac and I wanna make use of this
to fill in, maybe do some testing,
at least on some of these columns, like, how do I do that?
What's the benefit there?
- Well, I can tell you the case where it happened.
So we were shipping CMake,
and the scikit-build organization ran out
of Travis credits, and they were being built.
We hadn't switched them over to being emulated builds
on GitHub Actions yet.
And it just ran out, we couldn't build them,
and one of them had been missed,
and we also weren't waiting to upload.
So we had uploaded everything,
but we had one set or maybe it was all of the emulated builds.
I think it was one set of emulated builds.
It didn't work.
And so we wanted to go ahead and upload those missing wheels.
And I tried, but I couldn't actually get emulation,
the Docker QEMU emulation.
I couldn't get that working on my Mac.
So the Mini Linux maintainer used his Linux machine
And he had QMU emulation on it
and he built the emulated images, took a few hours,
but he just built them locally and then uploaded them.
- Okay, yeah, very nice.
So if I'm maintaining a package,
I got some package I'm putting on PyPI
and I want to test it, does it make sense to do it locally
or does it just make sense to put it on some CI system?
- For C build, usually, I do some local testing, but I'm also developing C build.
But, you know, usually it's probably fine to do this in your, just in your CI,
and usually you don't want to run the full thing every time.
Usually you have your regular unit tests, because C build is going to be a lot slower
because it's going through and it's making each set of wheels,
and then launching Docker images and things like that.
And it's installing Python each time for macOS and Windows.
So usually, unless if you have fairly quick build,
I've seen some people just run CI build wheel
as part of their test suite,
but usually you just run it, say right before release.
Yeah, maybe I usually do it once before the release
and then on the release.
- Right, exactly.
Okay, that makes sense.
'Cause it's a pretty heavyweight type of operation.
So when I look at all these different platforms,
I see macOS Intel, macOS Apple Silicon,
different bitnesses of Windows.
And then I think about CI systems.
You know, what CI systems can I use
that support all these things?
Like does GitHub Actions support both versions of macOS,
for example, plus Windows?
- GitHub Actions is by far our most popular platform.
It switched very quickly.
It used to be Travis.
Travis was a challenge
'cause they didn't do Windows very,
they still don't do Windows very well.
And it's a challenge for us
because we actually can't run our macOS tests
on them anymore because once we joined the PyPI,
the billing became an issue.
And so we basically just lost macOS running for it.
But Circle, I think, Azure, and GitHub Actions,
I think they do all three.
And you can always split things up.
Do Travis for the Linux and then App Fair for Windows.
You can do it that way.
One of the big things that I helped develop for CI Build
wheel was the pyproject.toml or any toml configuration,
but usually that one configuration for CI build
wheel.
So that way you can get your CI build wheel configuration out
of your YAML files.
That way it works locally, which is one of the things I was
after.
But also you can just do it and then
run on several different systems.
Like you might like the fact that Travis--
Travis is, I think, the only one that does the native strange
architectures.
you have to emulate it other places,
which is a lot slower, five times slower or something.
- Okay.
Yeah, so kind of split that up, get the definition
and then create maybe multiple CI jobs based on a trigger.
- Yeah, your CI scripts are really simple.
- Yeah, very cool.
- The example script is just a few lines.
It does not take much to do this, comparing on--
- Oh yeah, I didn't even--
- There's hundreds of lines it used to take.
- Yeah, sure, and I didn't even scroll down here.
you've got a nice grid on github.com/ipa/cibuildwheel
that shows on GitHub Actions,
which is supported on Azure pipelines,
what support--
- Oh, I was not right.
CircleCI doesn't do Windows.
- No, but yeah, AppVeyor, Travis, Azure, and GitHub do.
- Travis does do MacOS, but we can't test it.
- Theoretically, it doesn't.
Gotcha.
And then, yeah, I wonder about the M1,
the Apple Silicon ARM versions versus the Intel versions.
I don't know how well that's permeated into the world yet.
But the fact that they have Mac at all is kind of impressive.
- Nobody has an M1 runner yet.
There are a few places I think now
that you can purchase time on one, but no runners.
Last I checked GitHub Actions,
you couldn't even run it yourself on the M1.
That may have changed, I don't know.
That was a while back.
- Yeah, I mean, there are some crazy places out there.
I think there's one called Mac Mini Colo.
I think that's what it's called.
Let me see if that's,
yeah, I think that's it.
Yeah.
So you can go to these places like Mac Mini Colo
and get a whole bunch of Mac Minis
and put them into this crazy data center.
But you know, that's not the same as I upload a text file
into GitHub that says run on Azure on GitHub actions.
And then that's the end of it, right?
You probably got to set up your whole,
like some whole build system into a set of minis.
And like, that doesn't sound very practical for most people.
- Ideally with what you could do is,
I mean, you just need one mini
and then you set up a GitHub actions hosted runner,
you know, locally hosted runner.
- Yeah.
- And other systems do that too.
GitLab CI was big on that.
You can do anything on GitLab CI,
we just haven't tested that
'cause they don't have those publicly.
But if you have your own, you can do that.
I know somebody who does this with basically with root
and has a Mac mini and runs the M1 builds on that.
But you could do that.
I mean, I have a Mac mini
and the lead developer of CI Buildwheel
also has a Mac mini with the M1.
He has an M1 of something, I don't know.
- Sure.
- Mine is a Mac mini.
That's what I'm talking to you right now on.
It's a fantastic little machine.
- Yeah, it's very impressive.
I love the way the boost histogram, it was fast.
I have a 16 inch of almost maxed out MacBook
and the Mac mini M1,
it was faster on boost histogram than this thing.
- Wow.
Yeah, I have a maxed out 15 inches,
a little bit older, a couple of years,
but I just don't touch that thing
unless I literally need it as a laptop
because I want to be somewhere else.
But yeah, I'm definitely not drawn to it.
So you could probably set up one of these minis
for 700 bucks and then tie it up.
But that's again, not as easy as,
you know, just clicking the public free option that works,
but still it's within the realm of possibility.
- Yeah, and Apple has actually helped out several,
like I know Homebrew and a few others,
they've helped out with,
by giving them either Mac minis or something
that they could build with.
So they,
I believe brew actually builds,
home brew actually builds on real M1s.
I know it does because the builds are super fast.
I remember that.
Like it builds root in like 20 minutes,
the root recipe.
I gotta maintain that.
And the normal one takes about an hour
'cause it's running on multiple cores.
But it's like three times faster.
It's done in like 20 minutes.
It's just, I thought something was wrong
when I first saw that.
- It did, how could it be done?
Something broke, what broke?
Interesting.
All right, Henry, we're getting really short
We're a little bit over, but it's been a fun conversation.
How about you give us a look at the future?
Where are things going with all this stuff?
>> Next thing I'm interested in being involved with is scikit-build,
which is a package that currently sort of augments setup tools,
but hopefully will eventually sort of replace setup tools as the thing that you build with,
and it will call out to CMake.
So you basically just write a CMake file.
And this could wrap an existing package,
or maybe you need some of the other things that CMake has.
And this will then let you build that as a regular Python package.
In fact, recently, somebody sort of put together CI build wheel,
and scikit build, and the CMake example,
and built LLVM, and pulled out just the Clang format tool,
and made wheels out of that.
And now you can just do pip install clang-format.
It's one to two megabytes.
It works on all systems, including Apple Silicon and things.
I just tried it on Apple Silicon yesterday.
And it's a pip install.
Now you can clang-format C++ code.
And that's just mind-blowing.
You can add it to pre-commit.
So pre-commit CI, it runs in two.
I mean, I've been fighting for about a week
to reduce the size of the clang-format recipe
from 600 megabytes to just under the 250.
That was the maximum for pre-commit.CI.
And then you can now pip install it under about a megabyte
for Linux.
Oh, wow.
That sort of thing.
And I think that would be a really great thing to work on.
It's been around since 2014, but it needs some serious work.
And so I'm currently actually working on writing a grant
to try to get funded to just to work on basically
the scikit-build system and looking
for interesting science use cases that
would be interested in adapting or switching
an existing build system over or adapting to it
or taking something that has never
been available from Python and making it available.
Yeah.
And yes, root might be one possible thing.
Scikit-build packages.
I'm looking for a wide variety.
Yeah, how neat.
Scikit-build packages.
Fundamentally, just the glue between set of tools,
Python module, and CMake.
Yeah, so it's a real way to take some of these things
or based on CMake and sort of expose them to Python?
- Yeah, so you can just have a CMake package
that does all the CMake things well,
you know, like finding different libraries
and that I'm a big CMake person.
Honeybee basically uses it very heavily.
Most C++ does, it's about 60%, I think,
of all build systems are CMake-based now,
going from Gitware's numbers, but they make CMake.
But I think it's very powerful.
It can be used for things like that.
And it will really open up a much easier C++,
more natural in C++ and C and Fortran and things like that
and CUDA than is currently available.
Setup tools is--
Disutils is going away in Python 3.12.
Setup tools is not really designed
to build C++ packages or packages.
It was really just a hack on top of disk utils,
which happened to build just Python itself.
- Yeah.
- So.
- Well, scikit-build sounds like the perfect tool
to apply to the science space,
because there's so many of these weird compiled things
that are challenging to install and deploy
and share and so on.
So making that easier sounds good.
All right.
Well, I think we're probably gonna need to leave it there
just for the sake of time, but it's been awesome
to talk about all the internals of supporting scikit-hep
and people should check out CI Build Wheel.
It looks like if you're maintaining a package
either publicly or just for internal for your organization,
it looks like it'd be a big help.
- Yeah, if it's got binary,
any sort of binary build in it, yes.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Not build is fine.
- Yeah, right.
And I learned about build, which is good to know.
All right, so before you get out of here, Henry,
let me ask you the two final questions.
If you're gonna write some code,
primarily Python code, what editor would you use?
- Depends on how much, it'll either be VI
if it's a very small amount.
If it's a really large project that,
let's say it takes several days, then I'll use PyCharm.
And then I've really started using VS Code quite a bit.
And that's sort of expanding to fill in
all the middle ground and kind of eating in
on both of the other, both of the edges.
Yeah, there's some interesting stuff going there.
Good choice.
And then--
But all with the VI mode.
VI bindings, yeah, gotcha.
And then notable PyPI package.
I mean, we probably talked about 20 already.
If you want to just give a shout out to one of those,
that's fine.
Or if you've got a new idea.
I'm going to go with one that's--
might not get mentioned, but I'm really excited by it.
The development of it is--
I think the developer's quite new.
but what he's actually done as far as the actual package
has been nice.
It needs some nice touches.
And that is plot text, P-L-O-T-T-E-X-T.
And I'm really excited about that
because the actual plots it makes are really, really nice.
And they're plotted to the terminal.
And it can integrate with French.
And of course, I'm interested in it
because I want to see it integrated with textual.
I think a textual app that combines this
with file browsers and things like that
could be incredible.
- Yeah, so you could do things like with a terminal.
Yes, you could like cruise around your files,
use your root IO integration,
pull these things up here
and put the plot right on the screen, right?
But in the terminal.
Okay, yeah, this is really cool.
I had no idea.
This is based on rich, you say?
- It can integrate with rich.
- It integrates with rich, okay, got it, yeah.
- So as soon as I saw it, I started trying to make sure
the two people were talking to each other,
Will and the person who's developing this.
- Yeah, exactly, all right.
- So it makes these things work together.
- That's very cool.
They seem like they should, right?
They're in the same general zone.
- Yeah, and they do now.
There had to be some communication back and forth
as far as what size the plots were and things.
- Right.
- This should work in it.
A good recommendation.
Definitely one I had not learned about,
so I'm sure people will enjoy that.
All right, Henry, final call to action.
People want to do more with wheels, CI Build Wheel,
or maybe some of the other stuff we talked about.
What do you tell them?
- So we looked through, I think one of the best places to go
is the scikit-hep developer pages,
even if you have no interest in scikit-hep tools
or hep2hep at all.
And that sort of shows you how all these things
integrate together really well,
and has nice documentation.
Of course, CI Build Wheel itself is nice
and the PyPA, a lot of the PyPA projects
have gotten good documentation, as well as
packaging.python.org.
We've updated that quite a bit to reflect
some of these things.
But I really like the scikit-help developer pages.
I'm biased because I wrote most of them.
Nice.
Yeah, I'll link to those.
And I'll try to link to pretty much everything else
that we spoke to as well, so people
can check out the podcast player show notes
to find all that stuff.
I guess one final thing that we didn't call out
that I think is worth pointing out is CI Buildwheel
is under the PyPA, the Python Packaging Authority.
So it gives it some officialness, I guess you should say.
- Yes, that happened after I joined.
One of the first things I wanted to do was
I thought this should really be in the PyPA.
And I was sort of pushing for that
and the other developers were fine with that.
And so we brought it up and I actually joined the PyPA
just before that by becoming a member of Build.
So I got to vote on CI Buildwheel coming in.
But it was a very enthusiastic vote, even without my vote.
- Yeah, cool.
- And PipX joined right at the same time too.
So those were, it was an exciting time.
- Yeah, PipX is a great library.
I really like the way PipX works.
It's a great tool.
All right, Henry, thank you for being here.
It's been great.
Thanks for all the insight on all these internals
around building and installing Python packages.
- Yeah, there's also a lot more on my blog.
So isinumpy.gitlab.io.
So that's also a good link to look.
that links to all those other things obviously too.
- Awesome, all right.
Thanks again for being here. - All right, thanks.
- Yeah, see ya. - Thanks for having me.
- Yeah, you bet. - It was fun.
[BLANK_AUDIO]